# stigmapeace

A lot of us have heard the word stigma, but do many of us honestly understand the word’s implications? I’m not sure that a majority of us have thought about the word beyond the limited recognition it gets on the internet or in news media. So what is it and why does it matter? In the context of this article let’s look at social stigma specifically. Social stigma is the extreme discontent a person or group of people receive based on a perception from their peers and other members of society. The reasons for stigma are endless, but can be based on perceptions of gender, sexuality, physical disabilities, race, ethnicity, ideology, and mental illness. From a human perspective, experiencing stigma affects self esteem, puts people into psychological distress, and is all around damaging in both direct and subtle ways. Those who have the resilience to move past these negative experiences and see them not as hindrances to their day to day lives are the lucky ones.
In all honesty, I never thought much about stigma or social justice as a kid, and well into my adulthood. I certainly never considered that I’d go through an experience where stigma as a concept became front and center as something I’d go through or want to express myself about. I was naive and didn’t have the compass of experiences or the awareness to understand the impact of stigma, in all its horrible shapes, on persons based on prejudice, judgement and misperceptions of the circumstances surrounding their life. I’ve written previously about my own struggles with severe and terrible manifestations of mental illness, and I don’t think it was until I had been successful in recovery that I started to think about stigma seriously. And unfortunately, I had to experience stigma first hand in order to wake me up to a very global issue.
I’d like to admit, and speak from my own experience, that mental illness is incredibly confusing. It’s pretty fucked up, and it’s even worse for others to perceive you as something attached to that illness. I’ve tried very hard to manage my mental illness and I’ve been thankful to have been given the opportunity to reflect within and to be proud of my accomplishments in recovery. I’m adamant that one of the keys to my own success is my willingness to talk about tough things I believe to be true and learn to live positively because of them. In the present, I am able to quickly realize when I’ve been triggered, and I’m hungry and curious to dig deeper to try and figure out what went off-kilter during that moment. I find it best to be as expressive as possible. I deal with it. I have some bad days, but they are far and few between the really wonderful ones.
I think that one of hardest things to do is get rid of bias when interacting with another human being, and anyone who has a friend, family member, or neighbor who is going through a difficult time goes through the process of learning what to do and what not to do. It doesn’t matter what the relationship is, realistically I’m not sure if anyone is really safe from letting their perceptions seep into how they treat other people. It takes a lot of hard work to grasp the nuances of mental illness, and to be able to articulate and be honest about the issues. Honestly, it takes a willingness to be receptive and understanding to another person’s personal story. Certainly, it’s a tough position on both sides of a very complicated coin. It’s important to point out and understand that the experiences we have guide our perspectives in our own lives, and as well as to point out and understand that mental illness is separate from the person. I am not formerly a severely anxious and severely depressed person in precarious living conditions, but I was a person who was struggling with severe anxiety and depression that happened to be tied to the circumstances of those stressful and traumatizing living conditions.
One of the most difficult things I’ve learned and reflected on is that an unfortunate aspect, which was perhaps more damaging to my present self that I realized, of my mental health condition during my hardest moments was that it put me in a bit of a daze during a time when my situation and situations with relationships would have benefited with some honesty and clarity; I was so anxious and focused on just surviving in my immediate environment that I was able to ignore other people’s perceptions and my interactions with them. I have good friends who knew how to handle the situation and I have good friends who didn’t do so well in interpreting or perceiving what was going on, which was frustrating but not their fault. I know that I went through a troubling period of my life, and I can honestly say that I still struggle sometimes. Let’s face it, mental illness is forever but shouldn’t hinder you if you’ve gathered and learned the tools to manage, through therapy or on your own. And, it’s been life changing. Even more-so, I have issues built out of how I was treated when I was in a better place and in a position where I wanted to move forward independently and encourage others to educate themselves about the unseen sides of mental illness that ¼ of the world struggles with in varying shapes and forms. I believe that it’s human nature to make presumptions, assumptions, or pass judgements on others, but I think that what many people don’t realize is that these boxes affect their everyday interactions.
In most cases, I don’t believe these boxes exist on purpose. What we know, or, in a lot of cases, what we don’t know about the everyday struggles of the mentally ill puts in place an indirect bias — and that’s one of the burdens that inhibits understanding about something so complicated. I think that most people who act this way don’t mean any harm, they don’t mean to be insensitive, and don’t mean to be unkind. Maybe they don’t even realize what they’ve done, but unfortunately it can have a lasting impact on the person on the receiving end — in my opinion, much of stigma isn’t overt but can leave a subtle, yet psychological impact. As alluded to, I’ve had such experiences, and there is not much I can do to change that, except deal with the consequences and do the best I can with those feelings.
The University of Michigan is lucky to welcome thousands of intelligent and driven students into its’ undergraduate, graduate, and PhD programs each year, many of us prone to having existential crises. I’m one of them. Much of my second year of graduate school was spent dealing with my own severe manifestations. It wasn’t until after I graduated that I began to recover and I was glad to finally be on an upswing battle. As much as I struggled silently among my peers, there were a handle of people who knew about my struggles and interacted with me first hand and whom I trusted implicitly while others were third parties thrust in this confusing world because of whom they knew and because of happenstance. My experience with stigma that affected me the most came from these third parties.
Twice the UM student of various degrees, student of Chinese, and an all around super engaged and incredibly intelligent young kid, the person whom affected me the most shouldn’t have had to affect me at all. At his worst, he was judgemental and incredibly obtuse to another person’s experiences. At his best, he misunderstood the reality of someone going through a hard time and relied on his own bias to let it inform his decisions. I forgot about it right after it happened because I didn’t think about it as anything of note- it happened during a time was already a confusing mess. Months after I began to recover, I wanted to really think positively about mental illness by attempting to brainstorm how to use what had helped me the most — writing about my experiences — into a practical way to analyze word usage within a corpus of text as a therapeutic means to understand experiences in new ways. I wanted data science to tell me what was important to me at the time of writing down something very private and personal. I wanted to broaden my scope and get people involved to create a practical application using data science as a tool that others could implement themselves. It was a lofty goal because I’m not a data scientist, and am especially inept at the type of skills that would be needed to accomplish such a thing (and I still don’t, so please help!)
I decided to contact that young kid, a data scientist with the skills and drive for knowledge that might make him interested in my idea, and with whom I incorrectly concluded had only been swept up in the confusion of the previous season and at had at least moved on from his attitude as time had passed. Unfortunately, the same behavior that happened before, happened again and this time I got triggered because I was reliving a past experience. That’s the problem — stigma can so be covert and the development of triggers so sneaky that the effects can completely take you off guard. I had buried that experience so deep that another negative and unkind reaction of similar ilk from the same person snapped a wire and I faltered, but succeeded in waking me up to those experiences from before. I became afraid of him, afraid of the next thing that would happen if I tried to communicate something positive to him in the future. Essentially, I was someone who received a negative reaction to something positive and taught me I couldn’t trust that boundary. It’s had a lasting affect on me and brought even more confusion to some of my relationships. I view that experience as problematic, but one that I’ve tried to use positively and hope that he has learned about his own insecurities in ways that can encourage his own personal acceptance and understanding of the mentally ill. Honestly, I don’t fully believe that was his intention or that he even realized he was doing it and that’s how it was being perceived. But, it happened. And that’s the problem with stigma, indirect or otherwise. You can be a good person with good intentions, but still fall victim to your own perceptions and problematic attitudes. And that kid? He’s doing alright for himself — he’s a full fledged data scientist working out in Seattle at a company that has a need for algorithms and matrixes. I still think he acted with very little sensitivity, respect or empathy to another human being. He’s not on Twitter anymore.
My experiences with stigma has given me issues, triggers, it’s made me more defensive and it’s added a layer of sensitivity that for as much of a good thing being sensitive might be, is not something I’d wish on anyone. Not this time. My advice is to think about how someone would perceive your behavior, consider there is more to the circumstances to someone’s life than the brief moment you’ve interacted with them, and definitely don’t be an asshole. Be kind to yourself first and foremost, but be kind to others because that’s just the solid life thing to do. It’s okay to falter every once in awhile, but be honest about it when it happens. Generally, being aware about bias and misperceptions is a top notch way to live.
